# Transaction File API
When I was a BA in Form3, I stepped up to kind-of a Product Manager role to build with my team the whole new API called Transaction File API. 

The business reasoning was simple - the company was already processing real-time transactions one by one, now it was time to expand the company offering to processing batch transactions, for the transaction types that were going in massive volumes and were not as time-sensitive as the real-time payments. 

The task was to discover the scope of the project first (I have talked with all teams in Form3, especially gateway teams), to understand the business need and how are banks doing this currently with the payment schemes. I had to make sure we meet the requirements from all the gateways so that we could build scheme-agnostic solution. 
In the meantime I was working with software architect to understand what is possible on the tech side and design the API in a way that it meets requirements but is also secure, performant and scalable. For this I needed to learn some new technical terms like chunking the file and hashing it or request sign algorithm. 

After the scope and draft API design was in place, I wrote an API proposal where everything was explained and we were discussing with all the teams if this solution is ok for each team. This phase took months unfortunately, but the API was so important that we needed to make sure that all teams will be able to work with it later. In the meantime when the proposal was being processed, we started planning dev work with the engineers. I wrote business user stories and together with the team, we have done a couple of brainstorming sessions to plan what needs to be done from the engineering perspective. We planned all the endpoints, where to store the data, where to store chunks and what to validate in the request that the customer is sending us. 

After this phase we estimated work, I assembled the development plan and created the roadmap that was communicated to the management. In the roadmap I also had to plan the time needed for UAT testing, end-to-end tests with the gateway team and pentests and possible security vulnerability remediations. I also had to write the business case so we could get an approval to kick the project off. For this reason I needed to calculate the expected income from the API and the expected development and maintenance cost. 

After all was ready and approved, we kicked off the project with a 4-people dev team. The development was divided into sprints and I was present on sprint plannings, backlog refinements and retros so that the team could always ask me relevant business information and I could learn if the development is going as expected. In parallel I had weekly meetings with the gateway team that was building the scheme-specific part of our product and also with delivery manager who was communicating with the customer and programme manager who was responsible for keeping track of the deadlines. The development took 4 months. Of course there were problems in the meantime - the chunking mechanism was mor difficult than expected and the customer was changing their mind regarding the size of the file, they also had troubles accepting the file format that our engineers propose. Despite of the hiccups, we managed to deliver the service on time. First on staging so that the customer could test it (and after I tested all the endpoints successfully in Postman), and later on production after the pentests were complete. 

While the dev team was working on the development, I personally created the customer-facing user guide explaining the customer how to use the endpoints, how to format the file with transactions and the json in the http requests. I also added the "Transaction file" section of the API Docs which you can see because they are public here: https://www.api-docs.form3.tech/api/schemes/bacs/transaction-files/overview. 

The project ended up a success - after the production deployment we were still doing some non-critical changes and optimizing the service, but in general the service works well and is already used by multiple customers. 
